Copyright (c) 2017, Jeff Hlywa (jhlywa@gmail.com)
Released under the BSD license
https://github.com/jhlywa/chess.js/blob/master/LICENSE

What is your project

We made a low-degree of freedom chess game called ‘Chess 4 Everyone’ which allows people with some cognitive disability to play the game of chess against a computer, against competent chess players, or against others with similar conditions. In this chess game, depending on the degree of freedom (1, 2, or 3), the player can cycle through the suggested moves with the “spacebar” or the “left arrow” key. Then, the player can select his/her move using the “enter” key or the “right arrow” key. This allows for the player to easily choose their moves by using standard mover/picker switch methods. In the main menu of our game, players are given the option to quick start a game as a limited player vs the computer under two degrees of freedom (two choices per move). On the bottom of the main menu page, there is text that details what the game is. The other option in the main menu screen is the settings option. In this menu, players can choose their settings for their specific game. The first button details a player select option where players can either choose: Limited player vs. Computer, limited player vs. limited player, limited player vs. unlimited player, unlimited player vs. computer, and unlimited player vs. unlimited player. The next option decides the difficulty for the game. The player sets how many degrees of freedom (one, two, or three) for the limited player only. If the game only consists of unlimited players, then this option is not available. However, if there is a limited and unlimited player, then the difficulty can be chosen. After all the desired settings have been selected, the player can start the game from here. Also, if the settings are not desirable, then the player can reset the selections to their default settings using the “default settings” button. Finally, if players wanted to resume their saved game, the settings page has the load game button which takes you to the load game menu. On the load game menu, players/guardians can input their FEN strings that they acquired from pressing the “s” key on their previous chess game. However, if the
player/guardian inputs an incorrect FEN string, a message on the bottom of the page would appear saying “Not a valid game”. On the load game menu, there is a load game button that players/guardians can press once their correct FEN was inputted, or there is a main menu button. When players start their game, there is a chessboard in the middle of the webpage that the players can play using the same switch methods as before. The unlimited players can use the drag and drop method with their mouse to move the desired chess piece where they want. If one limited and one unlimited player are playing against each other, then the limited player has the switch method of browsing and selecting their moves while the unlimited player can use the drag and drop method of playing.
The possible move choices that are given to the limited players are generated by the program to represent at least one good move. One of the choices will always be the best move possible determined by our artificial intelligence. If there is more than one option, the program provides the best possible move mixed in with randomly generated moves. This allows the game to move forward relatively quickly and where true learning can take place.

Who is it designed to benefit

We wanted to create a chess game for those with some cognitive disability. The purpose of our chess game is to teach those who aren’t able to play with a physical chess game or deal with the complexity of chess head-on. We achieve this by giving the players only a few options where they just have to either click the “enter” key or the “right arrow” key on the keyboard. However, this is only for those who are limited due to their disability. The players can learn to play chess because they have to make a decision for which move they would rather choose from the given options. The one degree of freedom chess game is very good for players to learn the
basic functionality of the game by having only one option. Therefore, the players can see how each chess piece moves, and how some chess pieces don’t move. We also have a functionality so that anyone can play this chess game. So, two people without disabilities can play a chess game with no limitations. This is done by allowing the players the ability to manually choose (using drag and drop) their chess pieces and moves. Anyone can play chess together.

How is it implemented and how well does it work

Our entire program is implemented as a set of state machines, with different functions representing different machines. The same page is always used throughout the program and we use JQuery to delete elements or add elements at different times. At the very beginning of execution when the document is ready, executeMainMenu() is called which appends the main menu HTML and sets up the state machine for moving between or selecting the “quickplay” and “settings” buttons. When “settings” is selected, the board is cleared and executeSettings() is called. This appends the settings HTML and sets up the state machine for navigating through the settings options and the “reset”, “launch”, and “load game” buttons. If “reset” is selected, the body is cleared and executeSettings() is called again . If “load game” is selected, the body is cleared and executeLoadGame() is called with parameters related to the settings selected in the menu. This appends the load game HTML and sets up the state machine for switching between the “main menu” and “launch” buttons. When quickplay is pressed in the main menu, when launch is pressed in settings, or when launch is pressed in load game, executeGame() is called with parameters relating to the settings of the game. The parameters within executeGame() are difficultySetting, playerSetting, and fen. If fen is not null, we know we are loading a game. Else,
we are starting a new one. executeGame() also acts as a state machine but the states and the functions defined for those states are different depending on the passed in settings.
For example, if 0 and 1 are passed, this signifies a limited vs computer game with 1 degree of freedom. A Chess.js game is then created and functions aiMove() and userMove() are defined accordingly. To start the game, aiMove() or userMove() is called at random to randomly assign a player to white or black. In each function, after a move is made, each function simply calls the other function, creating a constant switch between the two functions until an end-game event is triggered. If 0 and 2 are passed, this signifies a limited vs limited game with 1 degree of freedom. Thus only one userMove() function is defined and it recurses over and over until an end-game event is triggered. If 0 and 3 are passed, this would be a unlimited vs limited game with 1 degree of freedom and again only one userMove() would be defined. The unlimited player uses a mouse to move and the onDrop event inherent to Chess.js calls userMove() upon a success. When userMove() is called, it disables the mouse from being used and after userMove() finishes, the mouse is re-enabled. This effectively allows switching between turns. At any time during a player move or specifically a limited player move, depending on the game mode, one can restart the game by pressing “r”, which relaunches executeMainMenu(), or save the game by pressing “s”. Pressing “s” appends a textbox to the screen with the FEN representing the game state. This can be copied and recorded to use to load a game in the settings menu. When an endgame event is triggered, we clear the body and call endGame(), passing in a parameter indicating whether black won, white won, or it was a draw, as well as the game settings parameters. This function appends HTML to the screen according to who won and also sets up a state machine for switching between the “replay” or “main menu” button. If “replay” is selected,
executeGame() is recalled with the same settings as before. If “main menu” is selected, executeMainMenu() is called.
Using this state machine approach, one can play any amount of games in a given sitting with any settings they desire for each game. We also designed the game load to work with any settings. Therefore, one can take the FEN from a limited vs. unlimited game that had to be paused and load the same game back up as limited vs. comp, if they wished. Further, one can take the FEN from any chess game, such as the Chess.com daily puzzle, and load it into our application. As far as we have seen, we have succeeded in implementing all of the listed features of this project.
